---
title: 'The Pitfalls of the Coming Out Narrative'
date: 2021-12-10
permalink: /writing/2021/12/13

---
###### This is an essay I wrote for my "English 140: Sexuality Studies" class discussing the implications of the dominant coming out narrative.
----

In the past few decades, queer stories have increasingly found their way into works consumed by the general public. This rise can be attributed to shifting attitudes about the inclusivity of the LGBTQ+ community. In many of these works, however, representation takes the form of the coming out story. Coming out is often defined as a public confirmation or disclosure of a queer/non-straight sexuality or sexual identity (Jagose and Genschel). Understandably, the coming out narrative has dominated LGBTQIA+ representation across mediums. It is a strong narrative that is easy to empathize with, and it has fostered representation in mass media for LGBTQIA+ individuals. It also is a palatable way for straight individuals to learn more. Despite its benefits, the coming out narrative arc has become reductive, emphasizing a one-dimensional view of queerness, invalidating many aspects of intersectionality, and playing into heteronormativity.

Firstly, while it has been positive for representation, the coming out narrative often becomes very one-dimensional. It perpetuates erroneous ideas about coming out. It illustrates coming out as a necessary declaration for acceptance and/or an endpoint of the process. Coming out is often depicted as a dramatic declaration to someone who is not part of the community. These scenes of coming out emphasize the other person’s reaction rather than the internal acceptance of the person coming out. Thus, it paints the need for acceptance rather than a desire for understanding. At first glance, acceptance in the context of coming out is ostensibly positive, but it is actually harmful because someone does not need acceptance when they come out; they are queer, and coming out (or not) does not change that. What someone seeks in coming out is a desire for understanding. This is not to say that the dominant narrative does not represent someone, but it does not lend to the nuance many people experience. Coming out is also sometimes illustrated as a one-time event when it is the opposite. Coming out is “an endless and recurrent process so that one is always having to reengage the questions one thought [were] settled” (Walters). An example of the one-dimensional coming out narrative is the movie Love, Simon. Simon spends most of the movie struggling to come out, and when he finally comes out, it is a public spectacle. Once he comes out to his community, it appears that his coming out story is over, when in reality, it has only just begun. While a more simple version of a coming out narrative that focuses on shared humanity helps non-LGBTQIA+ people better understand the experience, the simplistic narrative often flattens the nuanced experiences of queer people and does irreparable damage (Alexander and Rhodes). The concept of shared humanity found in many dominant coming out narratives diminishes the room for unique stories and differences within the queer community. In this way, dominant narratives thus contribute to a cycle that further bolsters normative narratives. 

The dominant coming out narrative that reaches the general public is also based on privilege, primarily in whiteness and heteronormativity. The narratives lack an intersectional lens, which contributes to harm done against members of the LGBTQ+ community that do not fit into the dominant version. Coming out narratives were shaped by gay liberation leaders in the 1970s, many of whom were white. These leaders emphasized the importance that everyone comes out as it could shift culture, but this plays an undue burden on many.  There are many issues with this dominant white narrative. For one, the narrative indirectly places unjustified blame on queer people of color. In fact, one study stated, “the act of not coming out may be read as an abdication of responsibility, or the act of somebody who is disempowered or somehow ashamed of their inherent gayness” (Rasmussen), which is not always the case. Beyond this, the idea that coming out is one of the best ways queer people can liberate themselves dismisses how, “sexuality, race, gender, and class are lived intersectionally” (Clare). It fails to recognize that coming out becomes more nonlinear and complex as various identities intersect. A dominant white narrative of coming out also underscores the idea that coming out will always benefit an individual, but this is not always the case for racial and ethnic minorities. One study indicated that coming out was beneficial for white men’s well-being but not for Latino men’s well-being (Villicana et al.). When coming out is framed only in the context of white experience, it invalidates the experience of queer people of color who may not view coming out as an imperative or may have more barriers to coming out. 

There is also a heteronormative privilege that dominant coming out narratives are tied to. Coming out demands labor and queer people to play into a heteronormative society because it requires them to declare their difference, signaling its otherness. The expectation of coming out demands that queer people share their identity even in unsafe spaces. In trying to break apart from the heteronormative society, coming out inadvertently plays into heteronormativity. It indicates that queerness is a “secret requiring declaration” instead of a truth that needs not to be declared (Rasmussen). 

The idea of coming out came from a desire for queer liberation, and it can continue to be a method for people who feel empowered by the process to assert their identity. However, it is imperative to acknowledge that coming out is a complex process, and the dominant coming out narrative is detrimental. Coming out narratives have helped launch comprehensive LGBTQIA+ representation in the media. However, until the coming out narrative stops perpetuating harm, discussions of representation beg the question: do we criticize the current reductive portrayals at the risk of minimizing representation? Or do we accept it in the hopes that it will drastically improve? Reforming representation means truly centering queer liberation for all queer people. Coming out is not necessary to be queer, and dominant coming out narratives must adjust so that there is no one dominant narrative. Life imitates art, and therefore, it is essential that representation accurately represents people across the LGBTQIA+ spectrum. White heteronormative coming out narratives place queer people in a position where they must choose to come out or not, subjugating them further into dangerous binaries. Refusing the dominant narrative allows queer people to claim their identity for the only person that identity should matter to: themselves.

##### Works Cited
Alexander, Jonathan, and Jacqueline Rhodes. "Flattening Effects: Composition's Multicultural Imperative and the Problem of Narrative Coherence." College Composition and Communication (2014): 430-454.
Clare, Stephanie D. "“Finally, She’s Accepted Herself!” Coming Out in Neoliberal Times." Social Text 35.2 (2017): 17-38.
Jagose, Annamarie, and Corinna Genschel. Queer theory. Melbourne: Melbourne University Press, 1996.
Rasmussen, Mary Lou. "The problem of coming out." Theory into practice 43.2 (2004): 144-150.
Villicana, Adrian J., Kevin Delucio, and Monica Biernat. "“Coming out” among gay Latino and gay White men: Implications of verbal disclosure for well-being." Self and Identity 15.4 (2016): 468-487.
Walters, Suzanna Danuta. The Tolerance Trap: How God, Genes, and Good Intentions are Sabotaging Gay Equality. New York University Press, 2014.
