

In 1815, at the age of 17, Mary Shelley gave birth to her daughter. She had unlocked the beauty of creation, only to have it snatched away from her two weeks later when her daughter passed away. Shelley had created, birthed, and lost her child all in the mere matter of weeks. She endured immense suffering through this experience, having been forced to directly confront the immense agony of loss so shortly after experiencing the joy of life. Frankenstein is the offspring of this pain and suffering. As a result, the novel explores the common theme of distress, an emotion that is seemingly inevitable in every human life. No different than the suffering humans of our world, Shelley’s characters become a part of the inevitability of suffering in Frankenstein. This cycle highlights the humanity of all characters, especially the Creature, who is perceived as evil and inhuman by most characters in the novel. 

All of the characters in Frankenstein are trapped in the cyclical nature of suffering. While the suffering varies depending on the different contexts of each character, they are all interconnected and follow the same pattern: the external infliction of suffering, the character’s attempt to relieve suffering, and the ensuing infliction of suffering unto another. This cycle begins when Victor Frankenstein loses his beloved mother, experiencing “the void that presents itself to the soul” (Shelley 40) for one of the first times. His struggle with her death provides the basis for his interest in exploring the nature of life and death. By breaking through the seemingly permanent bounds of life and death (Shelley 41), Frankenstein relieves his initial suffering from the loss of his mother. However, his suffering prevails due to the  “bitterness of disappointment” (Shelley 60) in his endeavors. He forms the Creature from an amalgamation of  ‘beautiful’ features and “limbs in...proportion” (Shelley 58), only to find that the Creature looks hideous. In his quest to relieve his suffering, he furthers his own and thus begins a cycle of suffering in the Creature. 

Similar to Frankenstein, the Creature has lost its semblance of a ‘creator’ or parental figure. So, in his attempts to relieve his suffering, he seeks out community and belonging, only to be rejected at every twist and turn. His naive expectations of human nature, where humans would embrace him “for the excellent qualities which [he] was capable of bringing forth” (Shelley 274), juxtapose the reality where he is degraded into “a monster, a blot upon the earth, from which all men fled and whom all men disowned” (Shelley 141). His journey to relieve the suffering of isolation and rejection is futile, as his “sorrow only increase[s] with knowledge” (Shelley 141). This, in turn, causes him to declare revenge upon Frankenstein. 

This cycle of suffering also involves the DeLacey family. The DeLacey family are the victims of rejection, having been forced out of their country. They are refugees, who are culturally isolated and live in “a very distressing degree” (Shelley 129) of poverty. Given the similarity in their circumstances to the Creature’s, the Creature expects for them to empathize with his plight, especially because the Creature is emblematic of good humanity regarding this family. Yet, they reject him just as they have been rejected, hurting the Creature. All of these characters become a part of a cycle of loss, which begins their suffering. They then strive to alleviate the suffering, which often concomitantly results in harming others. The cycle, therefore, never ends. 

Through this cycle, Shelley emphasizes that the impacts of emotional suffering are often more far-reaching than the impacts of physical suffering because they attack one’s personhood. The Creature’s physical suffering does not drive him to evil. Despite “pangs of hunger” (Shelley 121) and being  “oppressed by cold”(Shelley 120), the Creature still leads “with love and humanity” (Shelley 114), even feeling guilt after realizing he is worsening the DeLacey family’s physical suffering. The Creature’s evil is rooted in his emotional suffering, and the very nature of this suffering stems from shattered expectations and the loss of belonging. All humans need a community. The Creature is a metaphor of this interdependence, being the literal sum of many individuals.  As seen with the Creature, the suffering of being denied a community drastically restructures one’s outlook towards life.  It is the denial of community, a community that would set him “free from the misery… [he] feel[s]” (Shelley 176),  that breaks “the only link that held [him] to the world" (Shelley 165). 

These intrinsic ideas of isolation and general emotional suffering remain relevant throughout time, which speaks to the power of Frankenstein. Shelley’s Frankenstein is an extension of the notion that society creates its own ‘creatures.’ The creatures we birth are not inherently bad, but through the trauma of life, become part of the cycle of suffering. They are the sum of their own suffering but continue to inflict varying degrees of suffering upon others. In many ways, Frankenstein is a mirror that reflects the internal struggles people face on a daily basis to belong, and ultimately live free from the constant distress that accompanies being human. 

##### Works Cited
---- 
Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft. Frankenstein or, The Modern Prometheus. Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1998.
