---
title: 'Empty'
date: 2021-12-10
permalink: /writing/empty

---
###### This is a creative writing piece I wrote from the perspective of a doctor.
----

The first time I met Jackson, he instantly reminded me of my best friend. Loud. Hilarious. Kind. I know it wasn’t a good idea to think about that, but I couldn’t help it. I was still a naive resident. 

I met Jackson months into his sickness. I knew that his battle was a losing one. I had seen it too many times before to have naivety about that. Yet, when I walked into his ward, and saw him smiling, I sometimes liked to suspend belief. It was immature and selfish of me, but I did it. 

Everyday, I would go into Jackson’s ward. We would discuss, and I would do my best to give him my time. Time and connection was fleeting for everyone here because everyone was here for the same reason. I knew this extra time would mean I would have to work even later into the day, but it didn’t matter to me. Work-life balance seemed like a fallacy.

When I was able to sit down with him, Jackson would tell me about his parents, and what it was like growing up in Brooklyn. His childhood was hard, but his eyes lit up when talking about his home. He would tell me about about his friends and their hilarious shenanigans. He told me about his first love, and the people in between.

But last week, Jackson didn’t remember things as well. I hoped it was fatigue, yet I knew it wasn’t. I had seen this before. I talked to him as I always did. He told me the same stories of his friends. He couldn’t remember the name of his childhood friend, Jason. He spoke about how he hated going to church, but loved seeing how happy his mother was there. He would hesitantly laugh after some stories, as if he knew that one extra laugh would be the death of him. I wished I could see the people he loved so dearly. But every day that I walked into his ward, he was alone. I didn’t want to think too much about it. Why he spoke so highly of his mother and friends, but why no one had visited the entire time I worked here. 

That day, after I left Jackson’s ward, I heard a voice coming from nearby. It was Dr. Langer, who was coming out of the ward next door say “it’s a shame. She was an innocent victim.” I felt sadness because death in this place seemed so common, and I still hadn’t made peace with that. But the sadness was secondary to the rush of anger I felt sprout from the ground and wash over me. There was no such thing as an innocent or guilty victim here. I wanted to yell and berate him. But I stayed quiet. I don’t know why since I knew how quiet killed

Early today, I walked into Jackson’s ward. His once vibrant brown skin was a nearly translucent beige. His face green. His body somehow even smaller than before. He couldn’t speak much. He tried, but winced every word. I didn’t which infection it was. There was too many to count. 

“Jackson, can you rate your pain on a scale from zero to 10, with zero being no pain and 10 being the worst pain imaginable?” I asked softly. I needed to know whether I could alleviate some of his pain, but I felt bile raise in the back of my throat as I asked this question. I already knew that a number could not signify the pain he felt. But I had no other questions that would allow me to do my job. 

He opened his mouth, and closed it. No words. But a strangled sob poured out of his mouth.

“I don’t want to die” Jackson whispered with a strange patience. The sobbing paused, and Jackson’s eyes looked at me vacantly. Waiting for something. But I didn’t know what or how I could make it appear. For as long as I knew Jackson, I focused on the present. I could only do that because I knew what the future held. Perhaps in his way to protect me, Jackson and I had never discussed his death. 

So, suddenly, I didn’t know what to say. We stared at each other, and I held his hand the way I wish I had held my best friend’s. I didn’t want Jackson to die either. But this disease didn’t care what I wished. 

The next day, I came to Jackson’s room. It was empty. 
