---
title: 'Chronic Illness Through the Medical (and Social) Model'
date: 2021-12-10
permalink: /writing/chronicillness

---
###### This is an essay I wrote for my "English 269: Disability Studies" class exploring chronic illness and the idea of the "unhealthy disabled" through various models of disability.
----

Disabled people worldwide have fought hard to have their rights and equal protection recognized at par with other obligatory fundamental rights in society, rather than being views simply as an option. This activism has led to several disability models, including the social, medical, minority, and charity. Yet, there is a condition that resists strict characterization by these models: chronic illnesses. Those with “chronic illnesses do not fit most people’s picture of disability” (Wendell) because in disability studies, there is a delineation between an impairment and a disability. An impairment is “something that limits you physically or mentally” (Davis). According to the highly regarded social model, an impairment only “becomes a disability when the environment is not accessible” (Davis). Thus, someone is disabled not by their impairment, but by the constraints imposed by society. This, however, is not the case with chronic illnesses. A chronically ill person is disabled by both their impairment and society. Because of this, chronic illness resists the social model. The other model commonly used to analyze chronic illness is the medical model, which is where “a disability is seen as a disease in need of cure” (Davis), and the disability is placed within a body. This model can also be limiting because a disability is more than its embodiment. To discuss how models apply differently to various disabilities, Wendell’s piece, “Unhealthy Disabled: Treating Chronic Illnesses as Disabilities,” distinguishes the healthy and unhealthy disabled. The healthy disabled are “people whose physical conditions and functional limitations are relatively stable and predictable for the foreseeable future” (Wendell).  In contrast, the unhealthy disabled are “understood to be [people with] illnesses that do not go away by themselves within six months, that cannot reliably be cured, and that will not kill the patient any time soon” (Wendell). Through the lens of the medical model, Wendell’s piece captures the reality of the pain that the unhealthy disabled face. Yet, it also becomes clear that chronic illness can only be understood as a confluence of the medical and social models. 

One crucial idea when applying the medical model to the unhealthy disabled is that chronic illness is inherently tied to the medical complex. Despite criticism, recognizing the link between chronic illness and the medical model does not necessarily encourage the reductive medicalization of disability. Instead, it acknowledges that the beginnings of a chronic illness journey is often rooted in the medical setting. The medical environment becomes the base where the chronically ill can identify as disabled. With this understanding, the medical model of disability helps capture Wendell’s point that unhealthy disabled people, and healthy disabled people, can both benefit from recognizing impairment as it fortifies the reality of their disability. Chronic illness is sometimes referred to as an impairment instead of a disability because of the fear of medicalization of disability. Therefore, the social model of disability is employed instead. However, in the social model, the more chronically ill one is, the less disabled they are. This is largely because when one is sick, their source of disability is within their body, not within a society that they can barely engage. The medical model challenges this implication as it bases part of a disability within one’s body, the original source of pain. It allows for the thinking that an “impairment” can “in itself ..be a negative, painful experience” (Crow). This also allows healthy disabled people who have symptoms “similar to those caused by chronic illness” to recognize the reality of their pain. By focusing on the suffering and symptoms of disability, the medical model fortifies the truth of pain in the chronically ill because “some people with disabilities are sick, diseased, and ill” (Wendell).

One way in which the medical model fails Wendell’s piece is that the medical model improperly perceives disability as something only needing a “cure,” and it also fails to consider what being disabled encompasses more broadly. The “medical cure” that the medical model prioritizes seeks to revert one’s state of being back to the “norm.” However, even if the medical model succeeds in acquiring a cure to the bodily impairment, the disabled psyche does not change. Disability shifts one’s personhood permanently, which the medical model does not take into account. While a chronic illness does cause suffering, it “is not only suffering” (Wendell). The medical model fails to understand that a chronic illness also “creates different ways of being that give valuable perspectives on life and the world” (Wendell). Something else that Wendell’s piece enables is the idea that illness may not be inherently bad, but instead “we made less progress in recognizing chronic illnesses as potentially valuable differences than we have in relation to other disabilities” (Wendell). This is interesting because it places the pains of a chronic illness as the suffering that unites all disabled people, but it manifests in different forms. The medical model stands as an antithetical symbol of this sort of collective disability pride. The medical model has not been, and cannot be, the basis of a collective movement that advances the rights of disabled people in the same way the social model of disability has been. Similarly, the medical model of disability does not foster a source of disability pride. Despite the pains of a chronic illness, there is something to be said about a community and taking pride in the way a disability has shaped oneself. Chronic illness affirms livelihood. For most people with a chronic illness, being disabled and suffering in some sense is what it means to be alive. To not have a chronic illness anymore would mean that one is either “cured” or one is no longer alive. Moreover, the pride of disability does not originate from some ubiquitous idea; it stems from the fact that “solidarity between people with chronic illnesses and people with other disabilities depends on acknowledging the existence of the suffering that justice cannot eliminate” (Wendell). These nuances are things the medical model fails to recognize. 

The medical model continues to fall short in Wendell’s piece because it places the fault and burden of disability on an individual rather than society. Establishing this mode of thinking is problematic for a variety of reasons. While a bodily impairment is a primary source of pain for those with chronic illness, many challenges are rooted in society’s attitudes and mindset. For example, the pace of life is something that both invisibly and visibly disabled people struggle with.  The medical model reduces the need for accommodations for both the healthy and unhealthy disabled. If the issues lie within a body, society need not adjust. Therefore, while fatigue may be a symptom of a chronic illness, the medical model does not insist that society accommodates to someone’s “fluctuating abilities and limitations” (Wendell). Interestingly, the social model also fails in this regard, which only underscores the need for a new definition of disability. As Wendell discusses, the social model does not fit accommodations to pace and fatigue, because to do so would threaten the social model’s message that if society removes barriers, disabled people will perform just as well as anyone else. Fast pace and low fatigue workers are the expectation in this ideal of performance.  

Another place where neither the social model nor the medical model apply is in the realm of hypocrisy in assigning blame and suspicion. Regardless of the truth in chronic illness, “blame and responsibility for [invisible] disabilities are more persistent issues for unhealthy than for healthy people with disabilities” (Wendell). In the case of disability scholars, there is suspicion associated with someone who is invisibly disabled. Are they really disabled? Are they taking advantage of their ability to pass? In the case of the medical complex, finding a cause of an illness is emphasized. Is the patient actually ill? Did they cause their disease? The problematic medical model places the issue of disability within one’s body, and in doing so, the blame and responsibility are placed on those with chronic illnesses. Ironically, many disability studies scholars also implicitly believe this when thinking of chronic illnesses. This highlights the hypocrisy in some disability study scholars’ interpretations. Both the resented medical complex and staunch proponents of the social model of disability believe that those with chronic illnesses arouse suspicion. These ideas are all rooted in the notion that “those who are unhealthy are doing something wrong” (Wendell). This rejects the reality of chronically ill people who are attempting to navigate life to the best of their abilities.

Chronic illness in disability studies is a nuanced, challenging topic because chronic illness neither fully resists, nor completely fits into, the medical and social models of disability. The social model has primarily served the healthy disabled, whose disability stems from social discrimination and lack of accommodations. The medical model is also incredibly reductive because it limits the scope of disability. Thus, chronic illness requires a more nuanced definition of disability, similar to Tobin Sieber’s theory of complex embodiment, which “raises awareness of the effects of disabling environments on people’s lived experience of the body, but...emphasizes as well that some factors affecting disability, such as chronic pain, secondary health effects, and aging, derive from the body” (Siebers). However, regardless of how scholars choose to define disability, literature like Wendell’s piece is crucial in understanding the effects of these models on public perception and the variety within the disabled community. 

###### Works Cited
---- 
Crow, Liz. Including all of our lives: Renewing the social model of disability. In Encounters with strangers: Feminism and disability, ed. Jenny Morris. London: The Women's Press Ltd, 1996. 
Davis, Lennard J., et al. Beginning with Disability: a Primer. Routledge Taylor & Francis Group, 2018. 
Siebers, Tobin. “Disability and the Theory of Complex Embodiment—For Identity Politics in a New Register”. The Disability Studies Reader. 5th ed., Routledge, 2016.
Wendell, Susan. “Unhealthy Disabled: Treating Chronic Illnesses as Disabilities”. The Disability Studies Reader. 5th ed., Routledge, 2016.
