---
title: 'Commonplace Books & Spencerian Cursive'
date: 2023-04-12
permalink: /writing/2023/04/12

---

###### This is a project for my History of Writing Course.

<head>
  <script async src="https://pagead2.googlesyndication.com/pagead/js/adsbygoogle.js?client=ca-pub-7416472460612865" crossorigin="anonymous"></script>
</head>

<div class="notice--danger">
<p style="font-size:13pt">This project is for my History of Writing Critical Making Project. I combined both the making of a commonplace book using bookbinding techniques as well as Spencerian cursive. </p>
</div>

> ## Commonplace Book

<div class="notice--info">
<p style="font-size:13pt"><em>Commonplace books were a popular tool for writers and scholars during the Renaissance and Enlightenment periods. These books were used to collect and organize ideas, quotes, and other pieces of information that writers found interesting or useful. They were a way to keep track of one's thoughts and observations and to organize them in a way that could be easily accessed and referenced.
Commonplace books served several purposes, including providing a space for writers to record their own ideas and observations, collecting important quotes and passages from other writers, and creating a repository of knowledge that could be shared and referenced by others. These books were often seen as a way to support writing by providing a source of inspiration, information, and organization.
</em></p>
</div>

For the first part of my critical making project, and with the help of the Makerspace, I bound a commonplace book from scratch. It is loosely based on this video tutorial: 
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/BysUiyjB0jY" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

***Materials***
- Paper (5 reams)
- Cardstock
- Fabric 
- Xacto Knife
- Awl
- Glue
- Paint brush
- Sewing needle
- Thread
- Cardboard
- Binder clips
- Cheeseclotth

**Step 1**
Take paper and fold them into small reams of paper. Then, use an awl and make 3 uniform holes through each ream. 

**Step 2**
Thread a sewing needle and begin the saddle stitch method through each ream of paper.

**Step 3**
Once all the reams of paper are sewed together, place a cheesecloth on the spine and glue to ensure it adheres. Place 2 binder clips on each end to let the glue set.

**Step 4**
In the meantime, take an Xacto knife and carve out a fabric to place two small cardboard pieces (slightly larger than the reams of paper) and a spine on. When these are placed and situated, glue them to the fabric. 

**Step 5**
Glue all remaining pieces together.

<div class="notice--success">
<p style="font-size:13pt">Reflection: This was a difficult task given my joint issues and fractured wrist. However, it was also incredibly gratifying. Creating a personal encyclopedia requires a personal touch that bookbinding provides. The most difficult part of this process was sewing. My bookstring is a bit loose in areas because my inter-ream stiches were not very tight. In the future, I would be more vigilant about keeping the thread taut. I also really enjoyed keeping a commonplace book that was pocket-sized. I put quotes and poems that stuck out to me, invention ideas, and recipes. It was very personal but also something I would be proud of seeing. 
  </em></p>
</div>

> ## Spencerian Script

<div class="notice--info">
<p style="font-size:13pt"><em>Commonplace books were a popular tool for writers and scholars during the Renaissance and Enlightenment periods. These books were used to collect and organize ideas, quotes, and other pieces of information that writers found interesting or useful. They were a way to keep track of one's thoughts and observations and to organize them in a way that could be easily accessed and referenced.
Commonplace books served several purposes, including providing a space for writers to record their own ideas and observations, collecting important quotes and passages from other writers, and creating a repository of knowledge that could be shared and referenced by others. These books were often seen as a way to support writing by providing a source of inspiration, information, and organization.
</em></p>
</div>

For the second part of my critical making project, I wrote in Spencerian cursive. I based this tutorial and practice on this tutorial: 
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/9FYqm8mhJlk?start=1" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Below are images of Spencerian cursive in my commonplace book. I found that writing in Spencerian script was not super difficult. I have experience writing cursive from elementary school, and have a fountain pen. Thus, I have had some practice already. I think the biggest issue for me is navigating mistakes with pen, as well as consistency. Writing in cursive is not my norm, so I can easily mess up parts of a word. But, given the script and ink, I must move forward. 
